State-of-the-art SPH solver DualSPHysics:
from fluid dynamics to multiphysics problems
J.M. DomГӯnguez1*, G. Fourtakas2, C. Altomare3,4, R.B. Canelas5, A. Tafuni6, O. GarcГӯa-Feal1, I. MartГӯnezEstГ©vez1, A. Mokos7, R. Vacondio8, A.J.C. Crespo1, B.D. Rogers2, P.K. Stansby2, M. GГіmez-Gesteira1
1

EPHYSLAB Environmental Physics Laboratory, CIM-UVIGO, Universidade de Vigo, Spain

2

Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Civil Engineering (MACE), University of Manchester,
United Kingdom
3

Maritime Engineering Laboratory, Universitat PolitГЁcnica de Catalunya вҖ“ BarcelonaTech, Barcelona,
Spain
4

Ghent University, Department of Civil Engineering, Technologiepark 60, 9052 Gent, Belgium

5

Bentley Systems, Lisbon, Portugal

6

School of Applied Engineering and Technology, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, US

7

Saint-Venant Hydraulics Laboratory, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech, Paris, France

8

Department of Engineering and Architecture, University of Parma, Parma, Italy

*Corresponding author. E-mail address: jmdominguez@uvigo.es, ORCID: 0000-0002-2586-5081

Abstract
DualSPHysics is a weakly compressible smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) Navier-Stokes solver initially
conceived to deal with coastal engineering problems, especially those related to wave impact with coastal
structures. Since the first release back in 2011, DualSPHysics has shown to be robust and accurate for simulating
extreme wave events along with a continuous improvement in efficiency thanks to the exploitation of hardware
such as graphics processing units (GPUs) for scientific computing or the coupling with wave propagating models
such as SWASH and OceanWave3D. Numerous additional functionalities have also been included in the
DualSPHysics package over the last few years which allow the simulation of fluid-driven objects. The use of the
discrete element method (DEM) has allowed the solver to simulate the interaction among different bodies
(sliding rocks, for example), which provides a unique tool to analyse debris flows. In addition, the recent coupling
with other solvers like Project Chrono or MoorDyn has been a milestone in the development of the solver. Project
Chrono allows the simulation of articulated structures with joints, hinges, sliders and springs and MoorDyn allows
simulating moored structures. Both functionalities make DualSPHysics one of the meshless model world leaders
in the simulation of offshore energy harvesting devices. Lately, the present state of maturity of the solver goes
beyond single phase simulations, allowing multi-phase simulations with gas-liquid and a combination of
Newtonian and non-Newtonian models expanding further the capabilities and range of applications for the
DualSPHysics solver. These advances and functionalities make DualSPHysics a state-of-the-art meshless solver
with emphasis on free-surface flow modelling.

Keywords: Meshfree, Lagrangian, SPH, Particles, DualSPHysics, Navier-Stokes equations, Free-surface
flows

1

1. Introduction
The meshless method smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) has made great progress over the past
two decades with many contributions to the method continually appearing. Modern SPH schemes enable
the simulation of violent free-surface flows with improved accuracy, while new physical processes can
be included with relative ease accompanied by a significant reduction of the computational time
achieved through hardware acceleration.
The development of SPH enables the simulation of different physical phenomena, including violent
hydrodynamics of coastal/offshore waves impacting structures, galaxy and planetary formation and
evolution, flow in process industries characterised by multiple phases and mixing, large deformations
of solids and structures, modelling damage and failure, including opening and propagation of cracks,
fluid-structure interaction, and exploitation in computer graphics and computer games (see [1вҖ“4] for
recent examples). The most relevant advantages over Eulerian methods [5] are the exact conservation
of mass and momentum and the meshless properties. Despite these advances, some key challenges still
remain, and are encapsulated in the SPHERIC Grand Challenges (https://spheric-sph.org/grandchallenges).
With the large numbers of neighbouring particle interactions and the time step restricted by the Courant
condition for weakly-compressible flow, SPH is computationally demanding and there have been
multiple efforts within the broad SPH community to accelerate the simulations. Massive parallelisation
is the traditional approach where machines with tens of thousands of processing cores are used in a
combination of distributed and shared memory frameworks [6вҖ“8]. In the past 10 years, the exploitation
of hardware such as graphics processing units (GPUs) for scientific computing has gained traction. SPH
is particularly suitable to graphics processing unit (GPU) acceleration thanks to its vector lists of
particles and their interactions. Multiple GPU-based SPH codes now exist [9вҖ“11].
The open-source code DualSPHysics is being developed precisely to address these issues. The
DualSPHysics project is an open-source SPH package with a growing user community, including annual
international Users Workshops and 52,000 downloads in total with up to 10,000 downloads for each
sub-release. In a highly collaborative approach, the Universidade de Vigo, University of Manchester,
University of Lisbon, UniversitГ  di Parma, Flanders Hydraulics Research, Universitat PolitГ©cnica de
Catalunya, and New Jersey Institute of Technology have developed DualSPHysics, which represents
the state-of-the-art for exploiting the computational power of modern GPUs and enables simulation of
real engineering problems using a standard desktop PC. The open-source code is freely available at
https://dual.sphysics.org/ and is released under GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL).
DualSPHysicsвҖҷ name derives from being able to run on both central processing unit (CPU) using the
shared memory OpenMP approach, or on a GPU. The main thrust of the DualSPHysics development
has been to exploit the computational acceleration using the compute unified device architecture
(CUDA) programming framework on Nvidia GPUs. One of the guiding philosophies for this dual
functionality is that new features are developed first in C++ language for the CPU version, and once
validated they are more easily ported to a GPU using CUDA. This can facilitate new developers to
implement their own customized solutions without learning CUDA, which is less widespread than C++.
This approach allows engineers to focus on developing new functionalities, while computer scientists
can work on ensuring computational efficiency of the GPU version. The code has highly optimised
CUDA kernels for a single GPU, it uses hierarchical templates and optimized cell-linked neighbour lists
[12] to achieve maximum code flexibility and processing speed [13].
DualSPHysics comes with dedicated pre- and post-processing tools. In particular, the GenCase
application is used to generate all the necessary inputs. In the XML input files constants, geometries,
and parameters are specified. Recently, a graphical user interface (GUI) plugin for the open-source
software FreeCAD, namely DesignSPHysics (https://design.sphysics.org/), has made the workflow for
the generation of new test cases more straightforward and accessible. Different post-processing tools
2

are available inside the DualSPHysics package, either to visualise the simulation using any scientific
visualisation software such as Paraview or to extract computed quantities of interest (vorticity, surface
elevation, forces, etc.).
The DualSPHysics code has evolved continuously since its first release in 2011. The most recent release
(version 5.0, July 2020) includes many relevant novelties: (i) Coupling with the discrete element method
and Project Chrono (https://projectchrono.org/); (ii) Coupling with MoorDyn (http://www.matthall.ca/moordyn.html); (iii) a multi-phase solver (soil-water and gas-liquid); (iv) specialised
functionality for second-order wave generation and active wave absorption, plus relaxation zones; (v)
coupling with wave propagation models; and (vi) inlet/outlet flow conditions. Some limitations remain
related to the SPHERIC Grand Challenges (GC3: Adaptivity, GC4: Coupling, GC5: Applicability to
industry), which are the focus of ongoing research.
The aim of this paper is to present the novel developments of the DualSPHysics software, emphasising
the process of validation that is undertaken before software releases. The paper is organised as follows:
Section 2 describes the core SPH formulation. Section 3 is dedicated to the description of different
features: wave generation, fluid-structure interaction, inflow-outflow, and multi-phase formulations.
Section 4 presents one of the key developments of coupling with other models, including wave
propagation models, DEM, the physics engine Project Chrono and the library MoorDyn. Section 5
presents the new code implementation, which has changed significantly over the lifespan of the code.
In Section 6 validations and applications are presented. Finally, the current challenges are briefly
discussed in Section 7 in the context of ever-changing hardware, user demands and ongoing research.

2. SPH formulation
2.1.

Interpolants and kernel functions

The integral (continuous) representation of SPH in a domain рқӣә for a smooth function рқ‘“(рқҗ«), рқҗ« вҲҲ в„қрқ‘‘ can
be written as the convolution a kernel function рқ‘Ҡ and рқ‘“
f пҖЁ r пҖ© :пҖҪ пғІ f пҖЁ r 'пҖ©W пҖЁ r пҖӯ r ', h пҖ© dr ' ,
пҒ—

(1)

where the вҢ©вҲҷвҢӘ symbol denotes an SPH interpolant and will be dropped henceforth for simplicity, рқҗ«вҖІ вҲҲ рқӣә
is a temporary position variable and рқ‘Ҡ(рқҗ«, в„Һ) is a positive function with the general form of,
W пҖЁ r, h пҖ© :пҖҪ

1
пҒ·пҖЁ q пҖ©,
hd

(2)

with в„Һ > 0 and рқ‘һ = |рқҗ«|/в„Һ. The function рқң”: в„қ вҶ’ в„қ is a smooth non-negative function such that,

пғІ пҒ· пҖЁ q пҖ© dr пҖҪ 1 ,

(3)

пҒ—

with compact support (see Figure 1),
пҒ· пҖЁ q пҖ© пҖҪ 0 for r пӮі kh, k пғҺ

пҖ«

.

(4)

3

Figure 1. Shape and compact support of overlapping kernel functions.

The discrete convolution of рқ‘Ҡ and рқ‘“, defined herein as the SPH discrete approximation, is obtained by
f пҖЁ ra пҖ© :пҖҪ пғҘ f пҖЁ rb пҖ©W пҖЁ ra пҖӯ rb , h пҖ© пҒ„rbd ,

(5)

bпғҺP

where the subscripts рқ‘Һ, рқ‘Ҹ вҲҲ P = {1, вӢҜ , рқ‘Ғ} denote the interpolating and neighbouring discrete particles,
while рқӣҘрқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҹрқ‘‘ is the associated volume рқ‘ү of the b-th particle in P. The set P contains all particles within
the domain i.e. fluid F, boundary B and floating objects K as shown in Figure 2 with P = F вҲӘ B and K вҠӮ
B.

Figure 2. Sketch of different sets of particles рқ‘Һ вҲҲ P.

For a more complete description of SPH, the reader is referred to [14, 15] and a recent review in [5].
Similar integral and discrete expressions can be formulated for a gradient operator for a given function
рқ‘“ by,
пӮ¶f пҖЁ r пҖ©
пӮ¶r

пҖҪ пғІ f пҖЁ r 'пҖ©
пҒ—

пӮ¶W
пҖЁr пҖӯ r ', h пҖ© dr ' ,
пӮ¶r

(6)

by employing the convolution identity,
4

пӮ¶f
пӮ¶W
пҖӘW пҖҪ f пҖӘ
.
пӮ¶r
пӮ¶r

(7)

The discrete gradient takes the following form,
пӮ¶
пӮ¶
f пҖЁ ra пҖ© :пҖҪ пғҘ f пҖЁ rb пҖ© W пҖЁ ra пҖӯ rb , h пҖ©Vb , a пҖҪ 1, , N .
пӮ¶r
пӮ¶r
bпғҺP

(8)

Several smoothing kernels have been proposed in the literature as summarised in [16]. The smoothing
kernel or simply kernel takes the form of Eq. (2) and satisfies Eq. (3) and (4), with рқ‘Ҡ: в„қрқ‘‘ вҶ’ в„қ.
Moreover, it is positively defined within the support domain {вҲҖрқҗ« вҖІ вҲҲ О©; рқ‘Ҡ(рқҗ« вҲ’ рқҗ« вҖІ , в„Һ) > 0}, it is a
monotonic decreasing sufficiently smooth function defined over the interval рқ‘ҳв„Һ and,
limhпӮ®0 W пҖЁ r, h пҖ© пҖҪ пҒӨ (r) ,

(9)

where рқӣҝ is the Dirac delta function [17, 18]. Several kernel functions have been implemented in
DualSPHysics.
The widely used third order B-splines kernel (cubic spline) reads [18]
пғ¬ 3 2 3 3
пғҜ 1пҖӯ 2 q пҖ« 4 q
пғҜ
3
пғҜ1
W пҖЁ r , h пҖ© пҖҪ aD пғӯ пҖЁ 2 пҖӯ q пҖ©
пғҜ4
0
пғҜ
пғҜ
пғ®

0 пӮЈ q пӮЈ1
1пҖј q пӮЈ 2 ,

(10)

otherwise

where рқӣјрқҗ· is 10/7рқңӢв„Һ2 and 1/рқңӢв„Һ3 in 2-D and 3-D respectively.
The Wendland function [19], namely the C2 kernel which exhibits a positive kernel Fourier transform
[16, 20] and better pairing instability characteristics. The Wendland C2 reads
4

пғҰ qпғ¶
W пҖЁ r, h пҖ© пҖҪ aD пғ§1 пҖӯ пғ· пҖЁ 2q пҖ« 1пҖ©
пғЁ 2пғё

0пӮЈ q пӮЈ 2,

(11)

where рқӣјрқҗ· is 7/4рқңӢв„Һ2 and 21/16рқңӢв„Һ3 in 2-D and 3-D respectively.

2.2.

Governing equations

The governing equations are described by the Navier-Stokes equations for a compressible fluid. The
continuity and momentum equations in Lagrangian form can be written as,
dпҒІ
пҖҪ пҖӯ пҒІпғ‘ пғ— v ,
dt

(12)

dv
1
пҖҪ пҖӯ пғ‘P пҖ« пҒҮ пҖ« f ,
dt
пҒІ

(13)

and

respectively, where рқ‘‘ denotes the total or material derivative, v is the velocity vector, ПҒ is density, P is
pressure, О“ denotes the dissipation terms and f represents accelerations due to external forces, such as
the gravity.

5

2.3.

SPH discretisation of the governing equations

The mass conservation property of SPH,
dm
пҖҪ0,
dt

(14)

where the mass is conserved exactly within a Lagrangian particle, results in a density change due to the
volumetric change of the term at the right-hand side of Eq. (12). In the SPH formalism, the discrete form
of the continuity equation at a point рқ‘Һ with position рқҗ«рқ‘Һ reads [14],
m
dпҒІ
пҖҪ ПҒa пғҘ b v ab пғ—пғ‘ aWab пҖ« Da ,
dt aпғҺP
bпғҺP ПҒb

(15)

where the second term in the right-hand side represents a numerical density diffusion term [21].
The discrete form of the Euler equation in a SPH formalism reads

пғҰ P пҖ« Pb пғ¶
dv
пҖҪ пҖӯпғҘ mb пғ§ a
пғ· пғ‘Wab пҖ« f ,
dt aпғҺF
bпғҺP
пғЁ пҒІ a пҒІb пғё

(16)

where a symmetric SPH operator has been used that guarantees conservation of momentum [22].
2.3.1. Density diffusion terms
Two density diffusion terms (DDT) formulations are implemented in DualSPHysics which act as a high
frequency numerical noise filter improving the stability of the scheme by smoothing the density and
consequently the pressure. The latter is known to be spurious due to the collocated (in velocity and
density) and explicit (time integration) nature of weakly compressible SPH. These terms take the general
form of
Da пҖҪ пҒӨ hca пғҘпҒ№ ab пғ—пғ‘WabVb ,

(17)

bпғҺF

where рқӣҝ controls the magnitude of the diffusion term. The term рқӣ№рқ‘Һрқ‘Ҹ is based on the NeumannвҖ“
Richtmeyer artificial dissipation. Molteni and Colagrossi [23] introduced this artificial dissipation term
as
пҒ№ ab пҖҪ 2 пҖЁ пҒІb пҖӯ пҒІa пҖ©

rab
rab

2

.

(18)

Lately, Fourtakas et al. [24] modified Eq. (18) by accounting for the dynamic component of the density
by,

пҖЁ

пҒ”
пҒҲ
пҒ№ ab пҖҪ 2 пҒІba
пҖӯ пҒІab

пҖ© rr

ab
2

,

(19)

ab

where superscripts (вҲҷ)рқ‘Ү and (вҲҷ)рқҗ» denote the total and hydrostatic component of the density of a weakly
compressible and barotropic fluid by locally constructing the hydrostatic pressure as,
пҒҲ
Pab
пҖҪ пҒІ0 gzab .

(20)

Although both terms are not consistent near a truncated kernel support [21] (such as free-surface or a
wall boundary) thus, resulting in an outwards vector net contribution, the latter term improves the
behaviour of pressure near the wall boundaries by operating on the dynamic pressure.
6

2.3.2. Dissipation terms
2.3.2.1.

Artificial viscosity

An artificial diffusive term can be used in the momentum equation [25] based on the NeumannвҖ“
Richtmeyer artificial viscosity, aiming to reduce oscillations and stabilise the SPH scheme. The artificial
viscosity term is added in the SPH gradient operator in right hand side of Eq. (16) and reads,
пғ¬пғҰ пҖӯпҒЎ cab пғ¶ пғҰ hv ab пғ— rab пғ¶
пғҜпғ§
пғ·пғ§
пғ·
пҒҗ ab пҖҪ пғӯпғ§пғЁ пҒІab пғ·пғё пғЁ rab2 пҖ« пҒЁ 2 пғё
пғҜ
пғ® 0

v ab пғ— rab пҖј 0

,

(21)

v ab пғ— rab пӮі 0

(вҲҷ)рқ‘Һрқ‘Ҹ = [(вҲҷ)рқ‘Һ вҲ’ (вҲҷ)рқ‘Ҹ ]/2. Herein, c denotes the numerical speed of sound
where (вҲҷ)рқ‘Һрқ‘Ҹ = (вҲҷ)рқ‘Һ вҲ’ (вҲҷ)рқ‘Ҹ and М…М…М…М…М…М…
(see Section 2.4) and Оұ is the artificial viscosity coefficient. The parameter рқңӮ = 0.001в„Һ2,
with {рқңӮ вҲҲ в„қ; рқ‘ҹрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҹ > рқңӮ} guarantees a non-singular operator. It can be shown that О рқ‘Һрқ‘Ҹ вҲқ рқңҗ0 вҲҮ2 рқҗҜ, where
рқңҗ0 is the kinematic viscosity [14, 26]. The final form of the momentum equation in the presence of
artificial viscosity reads,

пғҰ P пҖ« Pb
пғ¶
dv
пҖҪ пҖӯпғҘ mb пғ§ a
пҖ« пҒҗ ab пғ· пғ‘Wab пҖ« f ,
dt aпғҺF
bпғҺP
пғЁ пҒІ a пҒІb
пғё

(22)

Due to its simplicity, the artificial viscosity formulation is commonly used in SPH as a viscous
dissipation term.
2.3.2.2.

Laminar viscosity

Viscous dissipation of momentum in the laminar regime in DualSPHysics is approximated by Lo and
Shao [27],
пҒө0пғ‘2 v a пҖҪ пғҘ mb
bпғҺP

4пҒө0 rab пғ—пғ‘Wab

пҖЁ пҒІa пҖ« пҒІb пҖ© пҖЁ rab2 пҖ« пҒЁ 2 пҖ©

v ab ,

(23)

where рқңҗ0 denotes the kinematic viscosity of the fluid.
2.3.2.3.

Sub-particle scale model

The large eddy simulation sub-particle scale model (SPS) [28] as described by Dalrymple and Rogers
[29] using Favre averaging in a weakly compressible approach is implemented in DualSPHysics. The
SPS stress tensor П„ is defined in Einstein notation over superscripts i, j according to
пҒҙ ij пҖҪ vi v j пҖӯ vi v j ,

(24)

2
пҒҙ ij
1
пғҰ
пғ¶ 2
пҖҪ 2пҒөSPS пғ§ S ij пҖӯ S iiпҒӨ ij пғ· пҖӯ Cl пҒ„ 2пҒӨ ij S ij .
пҒІ
3
3
пғЁ
пғё

(25)

modelled by an eddy viscosity closure as,

2

Here, рқңҗрқ‘Ҷрқ‘ғрқ‘Ҷ = [рқҗ¶рқ‘Ҷ рқӣҘ]2 |рқ‘Ҷ рқ‘–рқ‘— | , where рқҗ¶рқ‘Ҷ = 0.12 is the Smagorinsky constant рқҗ¶рқ‘ҷ = 0.0066, вҲҶ is the initial
1/2

particle spacing, and |рқ‘Ҷ рқ‘–рқ‘— | = 1вҒ„2 (2рқ‘Ҷ рқ‘–рқ‘— рқ‘Ҷ рқ‘–рқ‘— ) , where рқ‘Ҷ рқ‘–рқ‘— is an element of the SPS strain tensor. Using
the same variationally-consistent form of the pressure gradient (Eq. 16), the discrete form of the term
reads [29],
пғҰ пҒҙ ij пҖ« пҒҙ bij пғ¶ i
пғ‘ пғ—пҒҙ aij пҖҪ пғҘ mb пғ§ a
пғ· пғ‘ Wab .
пҒІ
bпғҺP
пғЁ пҒІ a пҒІb пғё
1

(26)
7

Finally, the momentum dissipation term in DualSPHysics takes the following form
пҒҮa пҖҪ пғҘ mb
bпғҺP

2.4.

4пҒө0rab пғ—пғ‘Wab

пғҰ пҒҙ aij пҖ« пҒҙ bij пғ¶ i
v
пҖ«
m
пғ§
пғ· пғ‘ Wab .
пғҘ
ab
b
пҖЁ пҒІa пҖ« пҒІb пҖ© пҖЁ rab2 пҖ« пҒЁ 2 пҖ©
bпғҺP
пғЁ пҒІ a пҒІb пғё

(27)

Equation of state and compressibility

In the SPH formulation implemented in DualSPHysics, density and pressure are coupled by means of
an equation of state (EOS) allowing for weak compressibility of the fluid based on the numerical speed
of sound [30],
пҒ§
пғ№
cs2 пҒІ0 пғ©пғҰ пҒІ пғ¶
пғӘпғ§ пғ· пҖӯ 1пғә ,
PпҖҪ
пҒ§ пғӘпғЁ пҒІ 0 пғё
пғәпғ»
пғ«

(28)

where рқӣҫ is the polytropic index (usually 7 for water), рқңҢ0 is the reference density, and the numerical speed
of sound is defined as рқ‘җрқ‘  = вҲҡрқң•рқ‘ғвҒ„рқң•рқңҢ [31].
Therefore, a numerical speed of sound is chosen based on the typical lengthscale and timescale of the
domain allowing for a 1% variation in density that results in a Mach number рқ‘Җрқ‘Һ вүҲ 0.1 with, рқ‘җрқ‘  =
10вҖ–рқҗҜвҖ–рқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ . Such a restriction in the speed of sound allows for larger timesteps within the explicit time
integration [30].

2.5.

Time integrators and time step

In DualSPHysics, two explicit time integration schemes are implemented. For brevity, the governing
equations are written as
dv a
d пҒІa
dr
пҖҪ Fa ;
пҖҪ Ra ; a пҖҪ v a .
dt
dt
dt

(29)

The time integrators are briefly introduced below.
2.5.1. Verlet time integration scheme
The Verlet scheme [32] is commonly used in molecular dynamics since it is a low computational cost
scheme with a second order accurate space integrator that does not require multiple calculation steps
within an iteration interval, the WCSPH variables are calculated according to,

v naпҖ«1 пҖҪ v naпҖӯ1 пҖ« 2 пҒ„tFan ;

пҒІanпҖ«1 пҖҪ пҒІanпҖӯ1 пҖ« 2 пҒ„tRan

ranпҖ«1 пҖҪ ran пҖ« пҒ„tv an пҖ« 1 пҒ„t 2Fan ;
2
,

(30)

Due to the integration over a staggered time interval, the equations of density and velocity are decoupled,
which may lead to divergence of the integrated values. Therefore, an intermediate step is required every
Nрқ‘Ҷ steps (Nрқ‘Ҷ вүҲ 40 is recommended) according to

v naпҖ«1 пҖҪ v na пҖ« пҒ„tFan ,

пҒІanпҖ«1 пҖҪ пҒІan пҖ« пҒ„tRan

ran пҖ«1 пҖҪ ran пҖ« пҒ„tv na пҖ« 1 пҒ„t 2Fan ,
2
,

(31)

8

