Topology optimization for microchannel heat sinks with nanofluids using an
Eulerian-Eulerian approach
Chih-Hsiang Chena , Kentaro Yajia,∗
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1, Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan

arXiv:2501.16749v1 [math.OC] 28 Jan 2025

Abstract
The demand for high-performance heat sinks has significantly increased with advancements in computing power and the miniaturization of electronic devices. Among the promising solutions, nanofluids have attracted considerable attention due to their superior
thermal conductivity. However, designing a flow field that effectively utilizes nanofluids remains a significant challenge due to the
complex interactions between fluid and nanoparticles. In this study, we propose a density-based topology optimization method for
microchannel heat sink design using nanofluids. An Eulerian–Eulerian framework is utilized to simulate the behavior of nanofluids,
and the optimization problem aims to maximize heat transfer performance under a fixed pressure drop. In numerical examples, we
investigate the dependence of the optimized configuration on various parameters and apply the method to the design of a manifold
microchannel heat sink. The parametric study reveals that the number of flow branches increases with the increased pressure drop
but decreases as the particle volume fraction increases. In the heat sink design, the topology-optimized flow field achieves an 11.6%
improvement in heat transfer performance compared to a conventional parallel flow field under identical nanofluid conditions.
Keywords: Topology optimization, Microchannel heat sink, Nanofluid, Eulerian-Eulerian approach

1. Introduction
The increasing computational demands and trend toward
highly integrated circuits have led to a rise in the power consumption of electronic devices. Thermal dissipation has become a critical concern due to high heat flux generation and the
miniaturization of electronic devices [1]. To address this issue,
the microchannel heat sink (MCHS), first proposed by Tuckerman and Pease [2], has become an attractive solution due to
its high heat transfer performance and compact size [3]. Over
the past decades, numerous studies have sought to improve
MCHS from various perspectives, including operating conditions [4, 5], coolant types [6, 7], material selection [8–10], and
channel configurations [11–13].
In terms of coolants, nanofluids introduced by Choi and Eastman [14] have attracted significant attention due to their superior heat transfer properties. The fundamental concept of
nanofluids is to disperse nanoscale particles into a base fluid to
enhance heat transfer performance, and they have been widely
applied in the field of heat dissipation [15–17]. Although typical flow field designs—such as parallel [18], fin-and-pin [19],
and wavy [20]—are widely employed with nanofluids, the
complex interactions between nanoparticles and the base fluid
present significant challenges in designing efficient flow fields
for nanofluids. Meanwhile, numerous studies have conducted
parametric investigations based on these designs [21–23]; however, their limited design freedom has constrained the performance improvements in MCHS.
∗ Corresponding author

As a method with high design flexibility, topology optimization can generate optimized configurations without relying on
the designer’s intuition. In topology optimization, the density
method employs a continuous design variable field, which enables smooth variations of material distribution throughout the
design domain during the optimization process. The introduction of a penalization factor eliminates intermediate values of
these design variables, resulting in a binary distribution of material [24]. Based on the idea of the density method, Borrvall
and Petersson proposed a topology optimization approach for
Stokes flow, introducing a fictitious force based on design variables as a no-slip boundary condition to determine the material
distribution of the pseudo-solid region [25]. Further research
has also developed topology optimization methods for heat sink
design. Dede [26] and Yoon [27] first proposed a topology optimization method for forced convection heat transfer problems.
Koga et al. proposed a topology optimization method for heat
sinks, defining a multi-objective function to maximize heat dissipation while simultaneously minimizing power dissipation in
their study [28]. Matsumori et al. developed a topology optimization method for heat sinks that accounts for constrained
input power [29]. Yaji et al. developed a topology optimization
method to maximize heat exchange, using a level set boundary expression to control the geometric complexity of the optimized configurations [30]. Dilgen et al. proposed a topology
optimization method for turbulent forced convection heat transfer systems [31]. Zeng et al. developed a two-layer model for
topology optimization to reduce the computational cost of 3D
heat sink design and experimentally verified that the optimized
result exhibits superior performance [32]. Zhou et al. intro-

Email address: yaji@mech.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp (Kentaro Yaji)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier

January 29, 2025

Nomenclature
u

velocity vector (m/s)

T

temperature (K)

x

position vector (m)

u

velocity component in the x-direction (m/s)

c

specific heat capacity (J/kg · K)

v

velocity component in the y-direction (m/s)

Cd

drag coefficient

tol

convergence tolerance for flow simulation

D

design domain

Greek symbols

dp

particle diameter (m)

α

inverse permeability (kg/m3 · s)

H

plate length (m)

h

β

projection parameter

3

ϵ

convergence tolerance for optimization

2

volumetric heat exchange coefficient (W/m · K )

hp

fluid-particle heat transfer coefficient (W/m · K )

η

threshold parameter

i

number of flow simulation iterations

Γ

boundary of the analysis domain

J

objective function

γ

design variable

K

momentum exchange coefficient (kg/m · s )

µ

viscosity (Pa · s)

k

thermal conductivity (W/m · K)

Ω

fluid domain

L

inlet length (m)

ϕ

volume fraction

n

number of optimization iterations

ρ

density (kg/m3 )

Nu

Nusselt number

Subscripts

p

pressure (Pa)

ave

average

Pr

Prandtl number

f

fluid phase
particle phase

3

3

Q

volumetric heat generation coefficient (W/m · K )

p

q

convex parameter

Superscripts

R

filter radius (m)

in

inlet

Re

fluid Reynolds number

out

outlet

Rep

particle Reynolds number

w

wall

duced a topology optimization method for manifold microchannel heat sinks and investigated the optimized results numerically and experimentally [33]. Although these studies proposed
topology optimization methods for heat sinks, they did not consider nanofluids as potential coolants. In terms of nanofluids,
Zhang et al. proposed a topology optimization method for
MCHS [34]. Due to the diluteness of nanoparticles, a singlephase model is employed to simulate the behavior of nanofluids, with its physical properties being temperature-dependent.
In their study, while optimized configurations can be obtained
using a single-phase model, the performance of the structures
optimized with nanofluids was inferior to those optimized with
pure water.
In the field of numerical investigations for nanofluids, although the single-phase model is frequently used, recent studies
have increasingly focused on the two-phase model for nanofluids. In the two-phase model, the particle phase is treated as a
continuous phase to account for the complex interactions between nanoparticles and the fluid. Bianco et al. investigated
the laminar forced convection flow of Al2 O3 nanofluid in a cir-

cular pipe with the single-phase and two-phase models. The
maximum difference in the average heat transfer coefficient between the single-phase model and the two-phase model is 11%
in their study [35]. Kalteh et al. conducted numerical simulations of nanofluid forced convection in a microchannel using the Eulerian-Eulerian approach. The average Nusselt number enhancement obtained with the Eulerian-Eulerian approach
is higher than that achieved with the single-phase model [36].
In terms of experimental validation, Fard et al. compared the
simulation results of single-phase and two-phase models for
nanofluids with copper nanoparticles and found that the twophase model results aligned more closely with experimental
data [37]. Beheshti et al. conducted a comparative numerical study of heat transfer with turbulent nanofluids in an annular channel. In their study, the single-phase model underestimates the experimental data at concentrations (1% and 1.5%).
In contrast, the two-phase model yields results that are closer
to the experimental values [38]. In summary, these studies have
demonstrated that the two-phase model provides more accurate
results and serves as an effective alternative for simulating the
2

(a)

heat transfer of nanofluids.
Several studies have employed topology optimization to address particle flow problems. In these studies, the EulerianLagrangian approach has been extensively utilized to optimize
particle trajectory and manipulation [39–41]. However, this approach leads to high computational costs when applied to the
collective behavior of nanofluids. In contrast, although Chen
et al. demonstrated that the Eulerian–Eulerian approach can
effectively tackle topology optimization problems for particle
flows [42], the assumption of one-way coupling in their study
limits the ability to capture the bidirectional interactions between the fluid and particles in nanofluids.
Based on the above, we propose a topology optimization
method for flow field design in MCHS with nanofluids using an
Eulerian-Eulerian approach. In the numerical model, the particle phase is treated as a continuous phase, and fluid-particle
bidirectional interactions are incorporated into the momentum
and energy equations for both phases based on the EulerianEulerian approach. The optimization problem is defined as
a heat transfer maximization problem under a fixed pressure
drop. The sensitivity information is derived using automatic
differentiation, and GCMMA (Globally Convergent Method of
Moving Asymptotes) is employed for solving the optimization
problem [43]. This study includes two numerical examples. In
the first example, we optimize the flow field in a square design domain commonly used for topology optimization in thermal management. This example serves as a preliminary exploration of various parameters to validate the proposed optimization method. In the second numerical example, we consider a
manifold microchannel heat sink (MMCHS) for optimization,
as shown in Fig. 1. In the MMCHS, dividers segment the microchannels into multiple sections, allowing fluid to flow downward into each section and upward out of it. Since the MMCHS
consists of periodic unit cells, we optimize the flow field in a
unit cell with a simplified two-dimensional model in this study.
The subsequent sections of this paper are organized as follows: In Section 2, we demonstrate the formulation of the governing equations and boundary conditions. In Section 3, we describe the representation of fluid and solid regions in the topology optimization method and formulate the optimization problem for flow field design in MCHS. In Section 4, we provide an
overview of the algorithm used in the fluid solver and outline
the optimization process. In Section 5, we compare the effects
of different parameters on the optimized flow field and optimize
the flow field in the unit cell of MMCHS. Finally, we present
the summary of findings and future work in Section 6.

Divider

z

Inlet

Outlet

x
y

Microchannel
Heated surface

(b)
x

Divider

y

Unit cell

Fin

Fig. 1: Schematic diagram of a manifold microchannel heat sink: (a) The flow
direction and key components in the MMCHS (b) Top view of a unit cell in the
MMCHS.

negative effects. In this study, we adopt the two-way coupling
assumption, meaning that the behaviors of the fluid and particles influence each other, while interactions between particles
are neglected. Additionally, we consider a steady-state laminar
flow for the numerical examples due to the broad range of laminar flow applications in MCHS [45–47]. Although the fluid
in the MMCHS exhibits both upward and downward flow behaviors, under high aspect ratio conditions—where the channel
width is significantly greater than its depth—the distributions of
physical quantities remain sufficiently uniform [48, 49]. Consequently, the flow field can be approximated as two-dimensional.
In addition, we further consider a uniform heat distribution
along the channel’s height and simplify the volumetric heat generation into the two-dimensional energy equation. The basic
assumptions are summarized as follows:
• The flow fields are treated as two-dimensional.
• The fluid is treated as a steady incompressible laminar flow.
• Heat distribution is uniform along the channel’s height.
• Particle-particle interactions are not considered.
• The gravity effect is not considered.

2. Analysis model

• Shape effects are neglected, and particles are spherical.

2.1. Assumptions

• Particle aggregation is not considered.

The particle volume fraction has a significant impact on the
behavior of nanofluids. Although increasing the particle volume fraction can enhance heat transfer, excessive concentration may lead to nanoparticle aggregation, which increases viscosity and reduces heat transfer efficiency [44]. Therefore, the
volume fraction of nanofluids is typically low to prevent these

2.2. Governing equations
Based on the assumptions in Section 2.1 and the EulerianEulerian model proposed by Kalteh et al. [36], the governing
3

the Cd is the drag coefficient, which is defined as follows:

24



, if Rep < 1



Re
 p
Cd = 

24


0.687


 Re (1 + 0.15Rep ), if 1≤ Rep ≤ 1000.

𝛤 in

(8)

p

The particle Reynolds number Rep in Eq. (8) is described as:

𝐷\𝛺
(γ = 0)

𝛤w

Rep =

𝛤w

(9)

For monodispersed spherical particles, the heat exchange coefficient h in Eqs. (3) and (6) can be expressed in the following
equation.

𝛺
(γ = 1)
𝛤 out

ρf |uf − up |dp
.
µf

𝛤 out

h=

𝛤w

equations for the fluid phase, including continuity, momentum,
and energy, are as follows:

k̃f
,
ϕf
k̃p
k̂p = ,
ϕp
k̂f =

(1)

∇ · (ϕf ρf uf uf ) = −ϕf ∇p + ∇ · (µf ϕf (∇uf + ∇u⊺f ))

(2)

+ K(up − uf ),
∇ · (ϕf ρf cf uf T f ) = ∇ · (ϕf k̂f ∇T f ) + h(T p − T f ),

where u is the velocity vector, p is the pressure, µ is the viscosity, ρ is the density, ϕ is the volume fraction, K is the momentum
exchange coefficient, T is the temperature, c is the specific heat
capacity, h is the heat exchange coefficient, and k̂ is the effective thermal conductivity. The subscripts ‘f’ and ‘p’ denote the
fluid and particle phases. Similarly, the governing equations for
the particle phase are described as follows:
(4)

∇ · (ϕp ρp up up ) = −ϕp ∇p + ∇ · (µp ϕp (∇up + ∇u⊺p ))

(5)
(6)

p = pin

The momentum exchange coefficient K in Eqs. (2) and (5)
can be expressed as follows:

3 ϕp ϕf ρf |uf − up | −2.65



Cd
ϕf , if ϕf > 0.8



4
dp


K=

ϕ2p µf

ϕp ρf |uf − up |



150
+ 1.75
, if ϕf ≤ 0.8,


2
dp
ϕf dp

(13)

where A and B in Eqs. (15) and (16) are given by the equations

 109
k
f
, respectively. According to Kalteh
A = kpf and B = 1.25 1−ϕ
ϕf
et al. [36], the value of ω is chosen as 7.26 × 10−3 in this study.
Fig. 2 shows the analysis domain and dimensions for the optimization problems. To account for the effect of pumping power
on heat transfer performance, we fixed the pressure drop between the inlet and the outlet in the numerical examples. The
boundary conditions for state variables in the first numerical
example are shown below:

+ K(uf − up ),
∇ · (ϕp ρp cp up T p ) = ∇ · (ϕp k̂p ∇T p ) + h(T f − T p ).

(12)

where k̃f and k̃p can be further expressed as follows:


p
k̃f = 1 − 1 − ϕf kf ,
(14)
p
k̃p = 1 − ϕf (ωA + (1 − ω)Γ) kf ,
(15)






 B(A − 1)

A
B−1
B + 1
2 
Γ=
ln
−
−
, (16)



B 
B 2
B


B
2
1 − A A(1 − A )
(1 − A )

(3)

∇ · (ϕp up ) = 0,

(10)

According to Wakao and Kaguei [51], the fluid-particle heat
transfer coefficient hp can be obtained using the empirical correlation as follows:
hp dp
1
3
(11)
= 2 + 1.1Re0.6
Nup =
p Pr ,
kf
where Pr is the Prandtl number for the fluid phase. Besides, as
proposed by Kuipers et al. [52], the effective thermal conductivities for both phases k̂f and k̂p are shown below:

Fig. 2: Schematic representation of the fluid domain Ω and the solid domain
D\Ω in the fixed design domain D, including the corresponding boundary expressions for the inlet Γ in , outlet Γ out , and wall Γ w .

∇ · (ϕf uf ) = 0,

6(1 − ϕf )
hp .
dp

T f = T fin ,
out

T p = T pin

p=p

ϕp = ϕin
p,

(7)

uf = 0,

up = 0

∇ϕp · n = 0
∇T f · n = 0,

where dp is the particle diameter. As mentioned by Kolve [50],
4

∇T p · n = 0

on

Γ in ,

(17)

on

in

Γ ,

(18)

on

out

Γ ,

(19)

on

Γ ,

(20)

on

Γ ,

in

w

(21)

on

out

Γ ,Γ ,

(22)

on

Γ ,Γ .

(23)

w

w

out

In addition, we apply the symmetric boundary condition in
the first numerical example to reduce computational cost. In
the second numerical example, since we optimize the flow field
in the unit cell, free-slip boundary conditions are applied to the
walls. The types of the remaining boundary conditions are the
same as those in the first numerical example.

design variables and incorporated them into the equations. The
re-formulated equations are presented as follows:
= −ϕf ∇p + ∇ · (µf ϕf (∇uf + ∇u⊺f )) (28)

∇ · (ϕf ρf uf uf )

+ K(up − uf ) − ϕf αuf ,
∇ · (ϕf ρf cf uf T f ) = ∇ · (ϕf keff,f ∇T f ) + h(T p − T f )
+ ϕf Q(T Q − T f ),

3. Problem formulation

+ K(uf − up ) − ϕp αup ,

Topology optimization aims to enhance the objective function by optimizing the material distribution within the design
domain D. Initially, we define a characteristic function for the
representation of solid and fluid regions to determine the material distribution, as follows:



1, if x ∈ Ω
(24)
χ(x) = 

0, if x ∈ D\Ω,

∇ · (ϕp ρp cp up T p ) = ∇ · (ϕp keff,p ∇T p ) + h(T f − T p )

(31)

+ ϕp Q(T Q − T p ).
The inverse permeability α and volumetric heat generation
coefficient Q can be described as follows [29]:
α(γ̃¯ ) = α + (α − α)γ̃¯

1+q
,
γ̃¯ + q

(32)

Q(γ̃¯ ) = Q(1 − γ̃¯ ),

where x is the position in D, and Ω represents the flow domain
in D. The characteristic function χ(x) is inherently discontinuous, which necessitates the relaxation techniques to facilitate a
smooth transition for numerical analysis. In this study, we employ a continuous function, γ(x), commonly used in the density
method, with values ranging 0 ≤ γ(x) ≤ 1.
Checkerboard patterns may arise in the material distribution
due to numerical instabilities [53]. To address this issue, we
implement convolution filtering as outlined below [54]:
P
i∈Ne,k w(xi )γi
.
(25)
γ̃k = P
i∈Ne,k w(xi )

(33)

where α and α are the maximum and minimum values of the
inverse permeability, respectively, Q is the maximum value
of the volumetric heat generation coefficient, and q is the
convex parameter. It is worth noting that Q is also necessary when converting a three-dimensional problem into a twodimensional problem. By employing methods such as the twolayer model [56], results comparable to those obtained in three
dimensions can be achieved if the height of the flow path is
sufficiently small. However, for simplicity, we follow previous
research [29, 30] and determine Q based on prior parameter investigations. By incorporating fictitious forces and heat sources
into the equations, we can evaluate the influence of design variables on the objective function through sensitivity analysis.

Here, γ̃k represents the filtered design variable on node k,
Ne,k denotes the set of nodes located within the filtering radius
R, and w(xi ) is the weighting function defined as below.

3.3. Heat transfer maximization problem
Heat transfer between the solid and fluid regions is a critical factor in the design of MCHS. In this optimization problem,
since the pressure drop between the inlet and outlet is fixed,
the objective function only needs to account for the heat transfer between the solid and the fluid. Therefore, the optimization
problem is formulated as a heat generation maximization problem as follows:
Z
maximize J =
Q(T Q − T ave )dΩ,
(34)
D
0 ≤ γ(x) ≤ 1 for ∀x ∈ D,

(26)

Although filtering can address the checkerboard pattern issue, it often results in the presence of gray-scale design variables in the material distribution. To address this issue, we employ the projection function to obtain the optimized configuration closer to a binary distribution as follows [55]:
tanh(βη) + tanh(β(γ̃k − η))
γ̃¯ k =
,
tanh(βη) + tanh(β(1 − η))

= −ϕp ∇p + ∇ · (µp ϕp (∇up + ∇u⊺p )) (30)

∇ · (ϕp ρp up up )

3.1. Representation of solid and fluid regions

w(xi ) = R − |xi − xk |.

(29)

(27)

where β is the projection parameter, η is the threshold parameter
and γ̃¯ k is the design variable after projection.

where T Q represents the temperature in the solid region, T ave
represents the average temperature of the fluid phase and the
particle phase, expressed as follows [57], where l denotes the
phase with l ∈ {f, p}.

P R
ρ |u | c T dΩ
D l l l l

3.2. Governing equations with fluid and solid representations
In Section 3.1, we defined the design variables used to represent the solid and fluid regions. To determine the distribution
of design variables during the optimization process, we further
introduced fictitious forces and heat sources dependent on the

T ave =

l∈{f,p}

P R
l∈{f,p}

5

D

ρl |ul | cl dΩ



(35)

4. Numerical implementation
Initialization

We develop a custom finite difference flow solver incorporating the NAPPLE (Nonstaggered Artificial Pressure for
Pressure-Linked Equation) algorithm. This algorithm allows
state variables to be defined on a collocated grid under specific
assumptions. Based on these assumptions, we can derive the
pressure-linked equation and discretize it using the harmonic
scheme to eliminate the checkerboard pressure pattern. For further details, refer to [42, 58]. Besides, the momentum and energy equations are discretized for both phases using a weighting
function scheme [59]. In fluid simulation, we use the maximum
residual values among all grid points as the convergence criteria
expressed by the following equations:
max ui − ui−1 ≤ tolu ,

(36)

max vi − vi−1 ≤ tolv ,

(37)

i

max T − T

i−1

≤ tolT ,

Filtering and projection

Solve governing equations

Compute the sensitivities

Obtain the distribution of design variables γ

Yes
Continuation
steps completed?

No

Update projection
parameter β

(38)
Yes

where i represents iteration count, u and v are the velocity components in the x- and y-directions, respectively. The convergence criteria for the state variables u, v and T for both phases
are denoted as tolu , tolv and tolT and are set to 1 × 10−6 , respectively.
Fig. 3 shows the flowchart of the optimization process. In
the first step, we initialize all the state and design variables.
In the second step, we apply the filter in Eq. (25) and projection in Eq. (27) on the design variables. In the third and fourth
steps, the numerical simulation is performed, and the sensitivities are obtained using the automatic differentiation with Adept
C++ [60]. In the fifth step, we use the GCMMA algorithm [43]
to determine the distribution of design variables. In the optimization process, we adopt a continuation method, gradually
increasing the value of β in Eq. (27) to remove gray-scale design variables. If the optimization meets the convergence criterion, the value of β is doubled, and the process returns to the
second step. This loop continues until all continuation steps are
completed. If the criterion is unmet, the process returns to the
second step without modifying β. The convergence criterion for
the optimization is as follows:
Jn − Jn−1
< ϵ.
Jn

No

Converge?

End

Fig. 3: Flowchart of the topology optimization process.

y
Wall

Outlet

Inlet
Symmetry boundary condition
x

L

Wall
H

Fig. 4: Analysis domain for the numerical scheme validation.

(H/L = 100), as shown in Fig. 4. The analysis domain is discretized with a quadrilateral mesh of 2000 × 30. The nanofluid
consists of water as the base fluid and copper as the nanoparticle material. At the inlet, the nanofluid enters with a uniform
velocity and a temperature of 293 K, while the static pressure at
the outlet is set to zero. The side walls are subjected to no-slip
boundary conditions, with the wall temperature set to 303 K.
In addition, the symmetry boundary condition is utilized for the
numerical analysis. The material properties of the nanofluid are
summarized in the table 1.
In this study, we first compare the average Nusselt number
variations with the Reynolds number at different particle volume fractions. The definitions and calculations of Reynolds
and Nusselt numbers are based on those provided by Kalteh et
al. [36]. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the numerical results align
well with those reported in the previous study. An increase in
Reynolds number enhances the convective heat transfer effect,
while a higher particle volume fraction improves the effective
thermal conductivity of the nanofluid. Consequently, the aver-

(39)

Here, n represents the number of optimization iterations, ϵ
represents the criterion for the optimization convergence and is
set to 1 × 10−4 in this study.
5. Results and discussion
5.1. Validation of numerical method
We validate the feasibility of the numerical scheme through
a numerical example from prior research [36]. In this problem,
the nanofluid flows between two parallel plates separated by L
= 200 µm. Each plate has a length 100 times its inlet width
6

analysis domain is relatively small for MCHS, this configuration is commonly used in topology optimization problems for
heat sinks [29, 30]. As a preliminary validation case, this setup
allows for evaluating the influence of different parameters on
the optimized flow field at a reasonable computational cost and
verifies whether the proposed method can generate flow fields
with superior performance.
In the fluid simulation setup, the analysis domain is discretized using a quadrilateral mesh of 100 × 50. The pressure
drop is set to 5000 Pa, and the inlet particle volume fraction ϕin
p
is 1%. The corresponding fluid Reynolds number is 67.1. For
the temperature boundary conditions, the inlet temperature T in
for both phases is set to 300 K, while solid temperature T Q is
set to 360 K.
In the optimization setup, the initial design variable is set to
0.9, while the inverse permeability α and the volumetric heat
generation coefficient Q have maximum values of 4.44 × 1010
and 5.33 × 1010 , respectively. The convex parameter q is set
to 0.05. In the filtering and projection, the filter radius R is set
to 1.8 µm, and the maximum value of the projection parameter
βmax is set to 64.

age Nusselt number increases accordingly.
Additionally, we examined the average Nusselt number for
different particle diameters under Re = 500 and ϕp = 1%. As
reported in Kalteh et al. [36], the ratio of the Nusselt number
for nanofluids to water is 40.43% and 42.47% for dp = 100 nm
and dp = 30 nm, respectively, with the Nusselt number of water
reported as 9.3. Based on these values, the average Nusselt
numbers for dp = 100 nm and dp = 30 nm can be calculated as
13.06 and 13.25, respectively. Under the same conditions, the
average Nusselt numbers for dp = 100 nm and dp = 30 nm in
this study are 12.74 and 13.42, showing a deviation of less than
2.5% compared to the prior study.
Table 1: Material properties of the Cu-water nanofluid.
Parameters

Symbols

Values

Unit

Fluid viscosity

µf

0.001

Pa · s

Fluid density

ρf

1000

kg/m3

Fluid heat capacity

cf

4181.8

J/kg K

Fluid thermal conductivity

kf

0.6

Particle viscosity

µp

1.38 × 10

Pa · s

Particle density

ρp

8954

kg/m3

Particle heat capacity

cp

383.1

J/kg K

Particle thermal conductivity

kp

386

W/m K

Particle diameter

dp

100

nm

Kalteh - 0%
𝜙p 0%
𝜙p 3%
Kalteh - 3%
𝜙p 0%
Present study - 0%
𝜙p 3%
Present study - 3%

24
22

W/m K
−3

3L

L

Design domain D
L

Kalteh - 𝜙
1%
p 1%
Kalteh - 𝜙
5%
p 5%
𝜙p 1%
Present study - 1%
𝜙p 5%
Present study - 5%

L

Nusselt number Nu

20

Inlet
𝛤 in

Symmetry boundary

Outlet
𝛤 out

y

18

x
16

14

Wall 𝛤 w

Fig. 6: Dimensions of the design domain D utilized for the heat transfer optimization problem.

12
10

5.2.2. Optimized flow field
The optimized flow field is obtained using the default parameters outlined in Section 5.2.1. Fig. 7 illustrates the optimized
flow field alongside the velocity and temperature distributions
for both phases. From Fig. 7(c) and (f), it can be observed that
as the nanofluid flows around the heat sink fins, it absorbs heat
generated by the solid through the thermal exchange, thereby
achieving a cooling effect. Due to the interactions between the
fluid and particles, the velocity and temperature distributions of
the fluid phase and particle phase are nearly identical. Notably,
as shown in Fig. 7(d), the particle volume fraction is distributed
uniformly across the design domain, even within the solid regions. This is due to the limitations of the fictitious body force
formulation, which causes particles to remain inside the solid
regions. However, since the particle velocity within the solid

8
200

400

600

800

1000

Reynolds number Re

Fig. 5: Average Nusselt number is evaluated with the Reynolds number at different particle volume fractions in the analysis domain shown in Fig. 4.

5.2. Heat transfer optimization problem
5.2.1. Details of numerical setting
In the first numerical example, the default material properties for the nanofluid are listed in Table 1. Fig. 6 shows the
schematic diagram of the analysis domain in this problem, with
the inlet length L set to 30 µm. Although the overall size of the
7

(a)

(b)

(c)

𝛾෤ҧ
0.0

𝐮f
1.0

(d)

(e)

𝜑p
0.0

0.0

0.01

𝑇f
Umax

(f)

𝐮p
0.0

0.0

Umax

Tmax

𝑇p
0.0

Tmax

Fig. 7: Optimized Results and distribution of physical quantities with: (a) optimized flow field (b) fluid velocity magnitude(c) fluid phase temperature (d) particle
volume fraction (e) particle velocity magnitude (f) particle phase temperature. The maximum values on the color bar for velocity and temperature for both phases
are 1.77 m/s and 355.8 K, respectively.

regions is extremely low, its influence on the optimization results is minimal.

5.2.3. Effect of pressure drop
First, we examine the effects of different pressure drops on
the optimized configurations, as shown in Fig. 9. The results
indicate that the number of branches in the optimized flow field
increases as the pressure drop increases. An increase in pressure drop enhances the overall convective effects within the
flow field, promoting the formation of additional flow branches.
Although increased branching leads to greater flow resistance,
it also enhances heat dissipation performance by providing additional heat transfer surfaces and disrupting the thermal boundary layer. Table 2 presents the results of the crosscheck. It can
be observed that the flow fields optimized under specific pressure drop conditions exhibit the best performance at their corresponding pressure drops. This demonstrates that the proposed
method can generate optimized flow fields under different pressure drop conditions.

Fig. 8 illustrates the convergence history for the optimized
flow field, showing a progressive increase in the objective function value with each iteration. However, the objective function value may occasionally experience a sudden drop. This
is because the projection function in Eq. (27) imposes abrupt
changes to the design variable field, resulting in short-term performance reduction.

20

J × 1011 W/m

18
16
14
12

Table 2: Crosscheck of objective function J (×1011 ) with pressure drop.
10

Analysis ∆p

1000

3000

5000

7000

1000
3000

11.0
14.6

9.3
16.4

7.4
15.6

6.3
14.6

5000
7000

15.8
16.4

19.0
20.4

19.3
21.8

19.1
21.9

8
0

10

20

30
40
Iteration

50

60

70

Fig. 8: Convergence history of the objective function J for the optimized flow
field shown in Fig. 7.

8

Optimization ∆p

